Update stylus intro (#2893)
OffchainLabs/arbitrum-docs: docs/stylus/gentle-introduction.mdx

import ImageZoom from '@site/src/components/ImageZoom';

### In a nutshell:

> - Stylus lets you write smart contracts in programming languages that compile to WASM, such as Rust, C, C++, and others, allowing you to use their ecosystem of libraries and tools. Language and tooling support exist for Rust. You can try the SDK and CLI with the [quickstart](/stylus/quickstart.mdx).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Stylus lets you write smart contracts in programming languages that compile to WASM, such as Rust, C, C++, and others, allowing you to use their ecosystem of libraries and tools. Language and tooling support exists for Rust. You can try the SDK and CLI with the [quickstart](/stylus/quickstart.mdx).
```

With a WASM VM, any programming language compilable to WASM is within Stylus's scope. While many popular programming languages can compile into WASM, some compilers are more suitable for smart contract development than others, like Rust, C, and C++. Other languages like Go, Sway, Move, and Cairo are also supported. Languages that include their own runtimes, like Python and JavaScript, are more complex for Stylus to support, although not impossible. WASM programs tend to be more efficient than EVM bytecode for memory-intensive applications. This efficiency comes from mature compiler toolchains for languages like Rust and C, which have benefited from decades of optimization work. The WASM runtime also executes faster than the EVM interpreter. Third-party contributions in the form of libraries for new and existing languages are welcome.

### How Stylus works

Bringing a Stylus program to life involves four stages: coding, activation, execution, and proving. The following sections describe each step.

#### Coding

> You write your smart contract in any programming language that compiles to WASM. Rust has the most developed support with an open-source SDK for smart contract development. C and C++ are also supported, so you can deploy existing contracts in those languages onchain with minimal modifications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You write your smart contract in any programming language that compiles to WASM. Rust has the most developed support with an open-source SDK for smart contract development. C and C++ are also supported, so that you can deploy existing contracts in those languages onchain with minimal modifications.
```

The [Stylus SDK for Rust](/stylus/reference/rust-sdk-guide.md) provides the development framework and language features for smart contract development. It also provides access to EVM-specific functionality that smart contract developers use.

#### Activation

Once you've written your contract, you compile it to WASM using the Stylus CLI (or another compiler like Clang for C/C++). Then you post the compiled WASM onchain.

> Before your contract can be called, it goes through an activation process. During activation, the WASM gets compiled down to a node's native machine code (like ARM or x86). This step also applies safety checks, including gas metering, depth-checking, and memory charging, to ensure your program runs safely and can be fraud-proven.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make your contract callable, it must undergo an activation process. During activation, the WASM compiles down to a node's native machine code (e.g., ARM or x86). This step also includes safety checks, such as gas metering, depth-checking, and memory charging, to ensure your program runs safely and can be fraud-proven.
```

Stylus measures computational costs using ink instead of gas. Ink works like gas but is thousands of times smaller. WASM executes faster than the EVM, so a single EVM operation takes as long as thousands of WASM operations. A finer-grained unit makes pricing more precise.

:::note
Stylus contracts need to be reactivated once per year (365 days) or after any Stylus upgrade. You can do this using [`cargo-stylus`](/stylus/using-cli.mdx#cargo-stylus-commands-reference) or the [ArbWasm precompile](/build-decentralized-apps/precompiles/reference#common-precompiles). If a contract isn't reactivated, it becomes uncallable.
:::

#### Execution

> When your Stylus program runs, it executes in a fork of [Wasmer](https://wasmer.io/), a WebAssembly runtime. Because Wasmer compiles to native machine code, it executes faster than Geth's EVM bytecode interpreter. This performance difference is the source of reduced gas costs for compute-intensive operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When your Stylus program runs, it executes in a fork of [Wasmer](https://wasmer.io/), a WebAssembly runtime. Because Wasmer compiles to native machine code, it executes faster than Geth's EVM bytecode interpreter. This performance difference reduces gas costs for compute-intensive operations.
```

EVM contracts continue to work exactly as before. When a contract is called, the system checks whether it's an EVM contract or a WASM program and routes it to the appropriate runtime. Solidity and WASM contracts can call each other, so the language a contract was written in doesn't affect interoperability.

#### Proving

Stylus builds on Nitro's fraud-proving technology. In normal operation, execution compiles to native code for speed. But if there's a dispute, the execution history compiles to WASM so validators can run interactive fraud proofs on Ethereum.

> This is what makes Stylus possible: Nitro can already replay and verify disputes using WASM. Stylus extends this capability to verify not just execution history, but also the WASM programs you deploy. The result is a system where any program compiled to WASM can be deterministically fraud-proven. For more details, see the [Nitro architecture documentation](/how-arbitrum-works/01-inside-arbitrum-nitro.mdx).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What makes Stylus possible: Nitro can already replay and verify disputes using WASM. Stylus extends this capability to verify not just execution history, but also the WASM programs you deploy. The result is a system where any program compiled to WASM can be deterministically fraud-proven. For more details, see the [Nitro architecture documentation](/how-arbitrum-works/01-inside-arbitrum-nitro.mdx).
```

Reviewer: A nit: "This is what" doesn't describe what this is—but this paragraph describes what "this" is. Could even make What makes Stylus possible an H4?
